Introduction to API Documentation
What is API documentation, why does it matter, and what are the benefits of creating it?

This article was originally posted by SmartBear. SmartBear is a software quality company offering tools for teams to better design, develop, and test their software at scale. You can learn more by visiting SmartBear’s blog, and you can also read the original article What is API Documentation, and Why It Matters? by Keshav Vasudevan.

Defining API Documentation
APIs can provide a lot of value internally to a company and also externally to end-users. However, for an API to be valuable, it must be easy to understand. This is where API documentation comes into the picture.

API documentation is technical content containing instructions about how to effectively use and integrate with an API. It’s a concise reference manual containing all the information required to work with the API. Documentation typically includes tutorials with examples and details about the functions, classes, return types, arguments, and much more. API Documentation is traditionally created using regular content creation (e.g., text editors) and maintenance tools.

Among all the phases in the API lifecycle, documentation is the area showing the most growth. This is especially true with the tooling ecosystem around documentation. Since documentation is traditionally something that fell on the backburner for development teams, it also means that there’s a lot of room for growth. We can have the best functional API, but no one will use it if they don’t know how to.

Before we continue, lets review:
Multiple choice
Which of the following is NOT something that might be a part of API documentation?


Tutorials


Examples


Instructions

(Selected)Correct:
The actual code that makes up the API

👏
Correct! API consumers are the primary target of your documentation - they don’t need to see your actual code!

Benefits of Well-Crafted API Documentation
So, what exactly do we gain by investing in API documentation? Well, some benefits include:

Improved End-User Adoption: Adoption patterns are already shifting towards developers in the technology sphere. One big reason for having good API documentation is that it improves the experience for developers using the API, which directly correlates with API adoption. People adopt APIs they enjoy using, and if we get documentation right, more people will find value in the services easily, leading to better growth and adoption.

Improved Developer Experience (DX): The third-party developer, typically one of many end-users for an API, is busy solving complex programming challenges. These developers want to integrate as quickly as possible to move forward in their software development, meaning they should immediately understand the value and usage of the API. The aggregate experience of the developer when discovering, learning to use, and finally integrating with an API is termed as developer experience (DX) — and excellent API documentation is the key to a great DX.

Increased Awareness: Satisfied end-users will be an APIs biggest advocates. As more end-users adopt an API and reach critical mass, there will be a probable increase in evangelism and word-of-mouth publicity by satisfied end-users.

Saves Support Time and Costs: In addition to driving increased awareness and adoption of an API, good documentation also decreases the amount of time spent onboarding new end-users, be it internal developers or external partners. Poor or no documentation means more frustrated users rely on a team to understand how to work with the API. In contrast, individuals and teams save countless hours responding to support requests when end-users are given the ability to try out the API before implementing it and are armed with detailed documentation to get started.

Easier Maintenance: Documentation leads to good API maintenance. It helps internal teams know the details of an API’s resources, methods, and their associated requests and responses, making maintenance and updates quicker.

Before we wrap up, lets review:
Multiple choice
Which of the following is NOT a benefit of API documentation?


Improved user adoption


Easier maintenance


Increased awareness

(Selected)Correct:
Faster initial release

👏
Correct! It is actually worth spending additional time documenting an API before it is released. The benefits of proper documentation are accr… Show more